<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Appendix</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="appendix" role="doc-chapter" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 class="first-child" epub:type="title">Appendix</h2>
                <p role="doc-subtitle" epub:type="subtitle">Notes on Terminology</p>
            </hgroup>
            <p>Since 1949 the de facto governing authority over the islands of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen, and Matsu has retained the official name “Republic of China” (中華民國), or ROC for short. For the sake of clarity and consistency we adhere to this usage throughout the timeline. However, this does not imply recognition of the ROC's claim to legitimacy as a continuation of the pre-1949 government of both mainland China and Taiwan. Official statements from PRC officials and media typically refer to the “Taiwan authorities” (台湾当局), while the pro-independence camp and mainstream Western media usually refer to this de facto state entity simply as “Taiwan” – leading to ahistorical and incorrect formulations like “president of Taiwan,” “flag of Taiwan,” etc. In non-governmental contexts we use the common demonym “Taiwanese” for people residing and/or born and raised in Taiwan, and for entities based there.</p>

            <p>The political divide between mainland China and Taiwan is also reflected in different writing and romanization systems for the Chinese language. The PRC has used simplified Chinese characters since the 1960s, while Taiwan continues to use traditional characters. With romanization the situation is arguably even more complicated: Hanyu Pinyin (汉语拼音) has been the standard in mainland China since 1958 (and internationally since 1982), while Taiwan has never adopted a standard romanization system. In this timeline and resource list we use pinyin to romanize names of mainland Chinese places and individuals predominantly associated with mainland China after 1949, as well as all pre-1949 Chinese individuals with some exceptions for persons commonly known in English under non-standard romanizations (e.g. Sun Yat-sen, Chiang Kai-shek). For places under de facto ROC jurisdiction and post-1949 Taiwanese individuals, we default to the most common romanizations of their names in English-language media. When each person is first mentioned we also include their Chinese name in parentheses: in simplified characters for post-1949 mainland individuals, and in traditional characters for post-1949 Taiwanese individuals as well as all pre-1949 Chinese individuals.</p>

            <p>The term <i>běnshěngrén</i> (本省人, lit. “people of this province”) refers to Chinese people in Taiwan whose ancestors, predominantly Hoklo (福佬) and Hakka (客家) from Fujian and Guangdong provinces, migrated to the island before the end of Japanese colonization in 1945. The term <i>wàishěngrén</i> (外省人, lit. “people from outside the province”) refers to those who moved to Taiwan from the mainland after 1945, as well as their descendants. <i>Běnshěngrén</i> do not include the non-Han peoples whose presence in Taiwan predates Chinese migration; those people are the Taiwanese <i>yuánzhùmín</i> (台湾原住民, lit. “original peoples of Taiwan”). <i>Yuánzhùmín</i> is typically translated into English as “aboriginal” or “indigenous,” both of which can imply a colonial relationality whose applicability in Taiwan is a matter of active debate. We therefore choose to leave the term untranslated, in analogy with <i>wàishěngrén</i> and <i>běnshěngrén</i>, so as to clearly delineate the island’s original inhabitants from those <i>běnshěngrén</i> who (especially in the pro-independence camp) have increasingly taken to describing themselves as "native Taiwanese."</p>
        </section>
    </body>
</html>