<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
    <head>
        <title>1: Timeline</title>
        <link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
    </head>
    <body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
        <section id="chapter-1" role="doc-chapter" epub:type="chapter">
            <hgroup>
                <h3 class="first-child" epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">a.</h3>
                <p epub:type="title">Pre-Colonial Taiwan and Early European Colonization</p>
            </hgroup>

            <ul>
                <li><p><b>~15,000 years ago:</b> Glaciation during the late Pleistocene Ice Age lowers sea levels in the Taiwan Strait, forming a <a href="https://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/server/api/core/bitstreams/53479601-1206-4258-b414-3f36284d4a24/content">prehistoric land bridge</a> that physically connects the island to mainland Asia until ~10,000 years ago in the early Holocene. Some of the earliest historical evidence of human habitation in Taiwan comes from this period.</p></li>
                <li><p><b>~4000 BCE:</b> A new wave of seaborne migration to Taiwan begins, originating from what is <a href="https://www.44whcfuzhou2021.cn/node/13420/20200511/5eb90540cd3b9.shtml">today southeastern China</a>. These people are known to have hunted, fished, performed horticulture, and cultivated rice and millet; they would become the ancestors of today’s <i>yuánzhùmín</i>.</p></li>
                <ul>
                    <li><p>Historical linguists believe Taiwan to be the origin of the Austronesian expansion. Through their common seafaring ancestors, <i>yuánzhùmín</i> are closely related to peoples that settled as far west as the Malagasy of Madagascar; to modern-day Filipinos, Malays, and Indonesians; and as far south and east as the Polynesians of Aotearoa / New Zealand, Hawai’i, and Easter Island.</p></li>
                    <li><p>As a result of these migrations, Taiwan became part of the Maritime Silk Road, a network of seabound trade routes spanning from China and Southeast Asia to India, the Arabian Peninsula, and the east coast of Africa.</p></li>
                    <li><p>Based on the island’s terrain, <i>yuánzhùmín</i> have long been differentiated into two broad groups. One group, inhabiting the western and northern plains, today includes the officially recognized Siraya, Makatao, and Taivoan peoples (along with many unrecognized groups). The other group, inhabiting the mountainous central and eastern highlands, today includes the officially recognized Amis, Atayal, Bunun, Kanakanavu, Kavalan, Paiwan, Puyuma, Rukai, Saaroa, Saisiyat, Sakizaya, Seediq, Taroko, Thao, Tsou, and Yami peoples.</p></li>
                    <li><p>The Chinese name Taiwan (臺灣 / 台湾) is thought to derive from that of the Taivoan people, who live near modern-day Tainan in the southwestern part of the island and were among the first to come in contact with both Chinese migrants and European colonists.</p></li>
                </ul>
                <li><p><b>230 CE:</b> Records from China’s Three Kingdoms period document an expedition from Eastern Wu that landed on an island referred to as “Yizhou” (夷洲). Most of its members are said to have died of unknown diseases, but the survivors brought back “several thousand” natives. Some historians have <a href="http://en.qstheory.cn/2022-08/11/c_796391.htm">identified</a> Yizhou with Taiwan.</p></li>
                <li><p><b>607-610:</b> The <i>Book of Sui</i> (the official history of the Sui Dynasty) records several expeditions to an island kingdom called “Liuqiu” (琉球) in the East China Sea. Modern historians identify it either as Taiwan or as the Ryukyus, an island chain to the northeast (currently governed by Japan) whose name is written with the same characters.</p></li>
                <li><p><b>1171:</b> Song Dynasty records <a href="https://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/items/9acf6721-ada0-4b83-8dda-230d48517f50">document</a> the presence of Chinese migrants on Penghu (澎湖), an archipelago just to the west of Taiwan (also known in Western literature as the Pescadores). Beginning that year, Song officials would send annual patrols and build permanent settlements to protect migrants from raids by peoples further to the east, most likely Taiwan or the Philippines.</p></li>
                <li><p><b>1281:</b> Penghu is <a href="https://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/items/9acf6721-ada0-4b83-8dda-230d48517f50">incorporated</a> into Jiangzhe province (comprising modern-day Fujian and Zhejiang) by the Yuan Dynasty.</p></li>
                <li><p><b>1349:</b> Chinese explorer Wang Dayuan (汪大淵) <a href="https://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/items/9acf6721-ada0-4b83-8dda-230d48517f50">provides</a> the first verified written account of Taiwan, documenting his interactions with <i>yuánzhùmín</i> and finding evidence (e.g. pottery) of prior contact but no permanent habitation by Chinese people.</p></li>
                <li><p><b>1371:</b> The newly founded Ming Dynasty <a href="https://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/items/9acf6721-ada0-4b83-8dda-230d48517f50">institutes</a> a ban on most maritime trade and coastal settlement, including a full withdrawal of Chinese settlers from Penghu. Defying the ban, Chinese merchants would continue traveling to Penghu and Taiwan and trading with the latter’s <i>yuánzhùmín</i> (with some learning their languages) in subsequent centuries. </p></li>
                <li><p><b>1523:</b> Ming China <a href="https://openresearch-repository.anu.edu.au/bitstream/1885/26689/8/01%20Reid%20Anthony%20Violence%20at%20sea%202010.pdf">bans maritime trade</a> with Japan specifically in hopes of stopping the increasing number of Japanese pirate attacks all along the Chinese coast. But the social and political upheaval in Japan during the Sengoku period only makes piracy more lucrative for Japanese and Chinese pirates alike. In particular, Lin Daoqian (林道乾) and Lin Feng (林鳳) would use Taiwan as a base for large-scale raids on the mainland in 1563 and 1574 respectively.</p></li>
                <li><p><b>1542:</b> Portuguese sailors on their way to Japan observe Taiwan and <a href="https://web.archive.org/web/20120514004941/http://www.gio.gov.tw/taiwan-website/5-gp/yearbook/docs/ch03.pdf">label</a> it on their maps as <i>Ilha Formosa</i> (“beautiful island”), giving rise to the island’s standard name in most Western literature until the mid-20th century.</p></li>
                <li><p><b>1593:</b> Toyotomi Hideyoshi, chancellor and imperial regent of Japan, <a href="https://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/items/9acf6721-ada0-4b83-8dda-230d48517f50">demands tribute</a> from the “ruler of Taiwan” but finds no one of that description. This occurs just a year after he launched a massive invasion of Joseon Korea with the eventual aim of conquering Ming China as well – a confluence of events that in many ways presaged the First Sino-Japanese War almost exactly three centuries later.</p></li>
                <ul>
                    <li><p>Under the Tokugawa shogunate, Japan would launch failed invasions of Taiwan in 1609 and 1616 before adopting the isolationist <i>sakoku</i> policy in 1633, ending all interest in occupying the island for another two centuries.</p></li>
                </ul>
                <li><p><b>1603:</b> Chinese explorer Chen Di (陳第) <a href="https://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/items/9acf6721-ada0-4b83-8dda-230d48517f50">visits</a> Taiwan on an expedition to suppress Japanese pirates, writing a detailed account of the lives and customs of <i>yuánzhùmín</i> titled <i>Dongfanji</i> (東番記, lit. “Account of the Eastern Barbarians”).</p></li>
                <li><p><b>1624:</b> The Dutch East India Company <a href="https://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/items/9acf6721-ada0-4b83-8dda-230d48517f50">builds</a> Fort Zeelandia near modern-day Tainan, marking the beginning of formal European colonization on the island. The colony of Dutch Formosa in southwest Taiwan becomes a major entrepot for trade with China, Japan, and the East Indies, aiming to prevent competing European empires (mainly the Spanish and Portuguese) from establishing footholds in East Asia.</p></li>
                <ul>
                    <li><p>When the Dutch arrive, they find several thousand Chinese residents already present on the island. Under their rule, tens of thousands more migrants would be recruited or kidnapped from Fujian province and brought to Taiwan as agricultural laborers, raising the total Han population to around 40,000. The Dutch would also attempt to forcibly convert large numbers of <i>yuánzhùmín</i> to Christianity, meeting stiff resistance (especially from the Siraya) that would not be quelled until 1636.</p></li>
                </ul>
                <li><p><b>1628:</b> The Spanish Empire <a href="https://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/items/9acf6721-ada0-4b83-8dda-230d48517f50">attempts</a> to start another colony in northern Taiwan with the building of Fort Santo Domingo. Compared to the Dutch, they are much less successful in this effort. In 1642, they would destroy the fort themselves after the Dutch defeat them in the Second Battle of San Salvador and expel them from the island.</p></li>
                <li><p><b>1644:</b> The Ming Dynasty <a href="https://chinaconnectu.com/wp-content/pdf/MingDynasty.pdf">loses</a> its capital Beijing, and shortly thereafter most of mainland China, to the Manchu-led Qing Dynasty. Some Ming loyalists retreat to Xiamen in Fujian province and continue resisting the Qing for several decades under the leadership of general Zheng Chenggong (鄭成功), also known in the West as Koxinga. </p></li>
                <li><p><b>1652:</b> Under the leadership of Guo Huaiyi (郭懷一), Han Chinese peasants in Taiwan launch a large-scale revolt against colonial rule that is suppressed by the Dutch and some of their <i>yuánzhùmín</i> allies. The peasants’ main grievance is a colonial head tax applied to Chinese but not <i>yuánzhùmín</i>. Around 4000 migrants or 10% of the island’s Han population are killed; one historian <a href="https://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/items/9acf6721-ada0-4b83-8dda-230d48517f50">considers</a> this “the first Chinese antiwestern uprising in modern history.”</p></li>
                <li><p><b>1662:</b> From his base in Xiamen, Zheng Chenggong leads an army that joins forces with both Han migrants and <i>yuánzhùmín</i> (whom he persuaded to turn on their erstwhile allies) and <a href="https://books.google.com/books/about/Taiwan.html?id=FHqMJSM6dAYC">successfully expels</a> the Dutch from Taiwan and Penghu. There he establishes the Kingdom of Tungning (東寧國) with the aim of restoring the Ming Dynasty in alliance with other loyalist strongholds in the south of mainland China. He dies shortly after and is succeeded by his son Zheng Jing (鄭經). At its height, the kingdom would control maritime routes between the East and South China Seas and maintain a trade network spanning from Japan and Korea to Southeast Asia.</p></li>
                <ul>
                    <li><p>In order to starve out the Tungning Kingdom, the Qing Dynasty issued its own ban on maritime trade and coastal settlement in Guangdong, Fujian, Zhejiang, Jiangsu, even as far north as Shandong province – often as far as 25 kilometers inland. With Dutch help, Qing forces finally managed to capture Xiamen and the other Ming loyalist bases on the mainland by 1663 (though Zheng Jing would briefly retake them during the 1673-81 Revolt of the Three Feudatories). Ironically this “Great Clearance” policy had the effect of triggering another wave of migration to Taiwan, bringing its Han population to at least 100,000.</p></li>
                    <li><p>Zheng Chenggong is widely revered today on both sides of the Taiwan Strait, but for <a href="https://www.economist.com/analects/2012/07/27/contested-legacy">markedly different reasons</a>. In the mainland he is regarded as a hero for liberating Taiwan from Dutch colonial rule and thereby inflicting the first major defeat of a Western imperial power at Chinese hands. In Taiwan on the other hand, the Ming loyalist Kingdom of Tungning is seen by Kuomintang supporters as a forerunner of the post-1949 Republic of China (with the PRC playing an analogous role to the Qing Dynasty), and rather ahistorically by independence supporters as a specifically “Taiwanese” proto-state.</p></li>
                </ul>
                <li><p><b>1683:</b> Qing forces under the command of Admiral Shi Lang (施琅), a former Zheng loyalist, take advantage of <a href="https://escholarship.org/uc/item/133829bz#page=289">political turmoil</a> after the death of Zheng Jing to mount an invasion of Penghu and Taiwan. They force the Kingdom of Tungning to surrender, putting an end to the last major outpost of Ming restorationism. (Small pockets of Ming loyalist resistance would sporadically arise for another century or so.) The length and severity of the conflict underscored Taiwan’s strategic location and importance as a base for foreign and domestic attacks on mainland China.</p></li>
                <li><p><b>1684 May:</b> The Qing Dynasty incorporates Taiwan as a prefecture of Fujian province, located right across the strait from the island. </p></li>
                <ul>
                    <li><p>During the next two centuries, the population of Taiwan grew to around three million as the rice, sugar, and fishing industries expanded. Significant numbers of Chinese merchants and laborers would also <a href="https://books.google.com/books/about/Taiwan.html?id=FHqMJSM6dAYC">migrate seasonally</a> between Taiwan and their home villages on the mainland, cultivating cross-strait trade without necessarily settling permanently.</p></li>
                    <li><p>Qing authorities generally placed high importance on maintaining order and preventing conflict between Chinese migrants and <i>yuánzhùmín</i>. Early on they repatriated many soldiers and refugees who had left the mainland for Taiwan during the war. They also imposed a permit system to restrict migration from the mainland (especially of full families), though it was often ignored by local officials and would be fully lifted in 1875. Most notably, from 1739-1875 Chinese migrants were <a href="https://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/items/9acf6721-ada0-4b83-8dda-230d48517f50">banned</a> from entering or acquiring land in the mountains of central and eastern Taiwan; during that period no uprisings by highland <i>yuánzhùmín</i> were recorded. On the other hand the lowland <i>yuánzhùmín</i> were largely sinicized and/or assimilated into Han culture, often through <a href="https://books.google.com/books/about/Taiwan.html?id=FHqMJSM6dAYC">intermarriage</a> when only single Chinese men were allowed to migrate.</p></li>
                    <li><p>That said, intra-ethnic tensions <i>among</i> Han Taiwanese erupted into violence so often that they inspired the phrase “三年一小反, 五年一大乱” (lit. “every three years a minor uprising, every five years a major rebellion”). Many migrants tended to <a href="https://books.google.com/books/about/Taiwan.html?id=FHqMJSM6dAYC">identify</a> with their original hometowns, religious sects, or language groups and were suspicious of those from different locales. When they arrived, they brought with them clan feuds and other rivalries from the Chinese mainland. Residual Ming loyalist sentiment also contributed to the unrest, most notably in the large-scale rebellions of Zhu Yigui (朱一貴) in 1721 and Lin Shuangwen (林爽文) in 1786. <i>Yuánzhùmín</i> often served as reliable allies and auxiliaries of the Qing government during such intra-ethnic conflict.</p></li>
                </ul>
            </ul>

        </section>
    </body>
</html>